# BUSTED

BUSTED (**B**ranch-**S**ite **U**nrestricted **S**tatistical **T**est for **E**pisodic **D**iversification) provides a gene-wide (_not site-specific_) test for positive selection by asking whether a gene has experienced positive selection at at least one site on at least one branch. When running BUSTED, users can either specify a set of foreground branches on which to test for positive selection (remaining branches are designated "background"), or users can test the entire phylogeny for positive selection. In the latter case, the entire tree is effectively treated as foreground, and the test for positive selection considers the entire phylogeny.

For each phylogenetic partition (foreground and background branch sites), BUSTED fits a codon model with three rate classes, constrained as $\omega_1 \leq \omega_2 \leq 1 \leq \omega_3$. As in other methods, BUSTED simultaneously estimates the proportion of sites per partition belonging to each $\omega$ class. This model, used as the alternative model in selection testing, is referred to as the _Unconstrained_ model. BUSTED then tests for positive selection by comparing this model fit to a null model where $\omega_3 = 1$ (i.e. disallowing positive selection) on the foreground branches. This null model is also referred to as the _Constrained_ model. If the null hypothesis is rejected, then there is evidence that at least one site has, at least some of the time, experienced positive selection on the foreground branches. Importantly, a significant result _does not_ mean that the gene evolved under positive selection along the entire foreground.

BUSTED additionally calculates "Evidence Ratios" (ERs) for each site. The ER gives the likelihood ratio (reported on a log-scale) that the alternative model was a better fit to the data compared to the null model. The ER for each site thus provides _descriptive information_ about whether a given site could have evolved under positive selection. The ERs _should not_ be interpreted as statistical evidence for positive selection at individual sites (instead, methods like [MEME](selection-methods/#meme), [FEL](selection-methods/#fel), or [FUBAR](selection-methods/#fubar) should be used for detecting selection at individual sites).

For each site, two ERs are reported: the _Constrained Model_ ER and the _Optimized Null_ Model ER. The Constrained Model ER calculates the evidence ratio using model parameters inferred from the Constrained model. By contrast, the Optimized Null model ER re-optimizes parameters inferred using the Constrained model for the given site of interest. These optimized parameter values are then used to calculate the site's ER. Again, while these ERs may be helpful descriptors of selection in the data set, they do not provide statistically valid evidence for positive selection at a site.

**If you use BUSTED in your analysis, please cite the following:** [`Murrell, B et al. "Gene-wide identification of episodic selection." Mol. Biol. Evol. 32, 1365–1371 (2015).`](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msv035)
